# 2 Approaches: HashSet and Two Pointers with Detailed Explanation

https://leetcode.com/problems/intersection-of-two-linked-lists/solutions/2116115/2-approaches-hashset-and-two-pointers-with-detailed-explanation/

[Leetcode](https://leetcode.com/) [160. Intersection of Two Linked Lists](https://leetcode.com/problems/intersection-of-two-linked-lists).

Here shows **2** Approaches to slove this problem: **HashSet** and **Two Pointers**.


# HashSet

We can use $\texttt{HashSet}$ to store linked list nodes.

1. Traverse the linked list $\textit{headA}$, and add each node in the linked list $\textit{headA}$ to the $\texttt{HashSet}$;

2. Traverse the linked list $\textit{headB}$. For each node traversed, check whether the node is in the $\texttt{HashSet}$.
	- If the current node is **Not** in the $\texttt{HashSet}$, continue to traverse the next node;
	
	- If the current node is in the $\texttt{HashSet}$, then all nodes starting from the current node are in the intersection of the two linked lists. Therefore, the first node traversed in the linked list $\textit{headB}$ is the node intersected by the two linked lists.
	
	- If all the nodes in the linked list $\textit{headB}$ are Not in the $\texttt{HashSet}$, the two linked lists do not intersect and $\textit{null}$ is returned.

```java
    public static ListNode getIntersectionNode_hash(ListNode headA, ListNode headB) {
        if (headA == null || headB == null) {
            return null;
        }

        Set<ListNode> seen = new HashSet<>();
        while (headA != null) {
            seen.add(headA);
            headA = headA.next;
        }

        while (headB != null) {
            if (seen.contains(headB)) {
                return headB;
            }

            headB = headB.next;
        }

        return null;
    }
```

## Analysis

- **Time Complexity**: $O(m + n)$
- **Space Complexity**: $O(m)$


# Two Pointers

If $\textit{headA}$ or $\textit{headB}$ is empty, they cann't intersect each other.

If both $\textit{headA}$ and $\textit{headB}$ are not **null**, we can use **Two Pointers** $\textit{pA}$ and $\textit{pB}$ which point to the head nodes $\textit{headA}$ and $\textit{headB}$. 

Then traverse each node of $\textit{headA}$ and $\textit{headB}$ with $\textit{pA}$ and $\textit{pB}$. 

- We needs to update the pointers $\textit{pA}$ and $\textit{pB}$ at the same time.

- If the pointer $\textit{pA}$ is not null, move the pointer $\textit{pA}$ to the next node; If the pointer $\textit{pB}$ is not $\textit{null}$, move the pointer $\textit{pB}$ to the next node.

- If the pointer $\textit{pA}$ is null, move the pointer $\textit{pA}$ to the head node of the linked list $\textit{headB}$ ; If the pointer $\textit{pB}$ is null, move the pointer $\textit{pB}$ to the head node of $\textit{headA}$ .

- When the $\textit{pA}$ and $\textit{pB}$ point to the same node or both are **null**, return the node they point to or $\textit{null}$.

```java
    public static ListNode getIntersectionNode(ListNode headA, ListNode headB) {
        if (headA == null || headB == null) {
            return null;
        }

        ListNode pA = headA;
        ListNode pB = headB;
        while (pA != pB) {
            pA = pA != null ? pA.next : headB;
            pB = pB != null ? pB.next : headA;
        }

        return pA;
    }
```

## Analysis

- **Time Complexity**: $O(m + n)$
- **Space Complexity**: $O(1)$


--------------------------

All suggestions are welcome. 
If you have any query or suggestion please comment below.
Please upvote👍 if you like💗 it. Thank you:-)

Explore More [Leetcode Solutions](https://leetcode.com/discuss/general-discussion/1868912/My-Leetcode-Solutions-All-In-One). 😉😃💗

